MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
2 
Mark schemes are prepared by the Lead Assessment Writer and considered, together with the relevant 
questions, by a panel of subject examiners.  This mark scheme includes any amendments made at the 
standardisation events which all examiners participate in and is the scheme which was used by them in 
this examination.  The standardisation process ensures that the mark scheme covers the students’ 
responses to questions and that every examiner understands and applies it in the same correct way.  As 
preparation for standardisation each examiner analyses a number of students’ scripts.  Alternative 
answers not already covered by the mark scheme are discussed and legislated for.  If, after the 
standardisation process, examiners encounter unusual answers which have not been raised they are 
required to refer these to the Lead Examiner. 
 
It must be stressed that a mark scheme is a working document, in many cases further developed and 
expanded on the basis of students’ reactions to a particular paper.  Assumptions about future mark 
schemes on the basis of one year’s document should be avoided; whilst the guiding principles of 
assessment remain constant, details will change, depending on the content of a particular examination 
paper. 
 
 
Further copies of this mark scheme are available from aqa.org.uk 
 
    
Copyright information 
 
AQA retains the copyright on all its publications.  However, registered schools/colleges for AQA are permitted to copy material from this booklet for their own 
internal use, with the following important exception: AQA cannot give permission to schools/colleges to photocopy any material that is acknowledged to a third 
party even for internal use within the centre. 
 
Copyright © 2023 AQA and its licensors. All rights reserved. 

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
3 
Mark Schemes for GCSE Religious Studies 
 
This paper requires expert markers who have wide knowledge and understanding of the particular 
subject content of the Specification.  With the exception of the multiple-choice question, many of the 
questions asked have many different creditable answers and students are able to bring to their answers 
their own knowledge, understanding and background.  They will offer details, arguments and evidence 
which the examiner, with the help of the mark scheme, will need to judge as creditable or not.  It is 
therefore important that the examiner has a good understanding of the principles and spirit of the mark 
scheme in order to be fair and consistent when marking students’ answers.  The Content included is 
designed to be as helpful as possible but in many cases is not exhaustive.  So Content sections are 
introduced by the sentence: 
 
Students may include some of the following points, but all other relevant points must be credited:  
 
this is to remind examiners that there may well be additional correct answers which, with their expertise, 
they will be able to allow.  With all questions if an examiner has any doubt about answers being credit 
worthy they should consult their team leader. 
 
Structure 
 
The mark scheme for each question shows: 
 
• The question; Each question is printed in full before its target and mark scheme. It is always important 
that examiners remind themselves of the exact question being asked.  In particular, they will need to 
do this in instances where the answer appears to be ‘straying’ from the question set or perhaps offers 
a valid alternative not included in the mark scheme 
• Target; The target provides the specific assessment objective which the question is testing.  It reminds 
examiners of the skills the question is designed to test, eg knowledge and understanding, evaluation 
• The total marks available for the question and if Spelling, Punctuation and Grammar is assessed 
• The typical answer(s) or content which are expected  
• Generic instructions related to the question target of how to award marks (i.e. levels of response grid).   
 
Themes papers guidance (Specification A & Short Course) 
 
In questions where students may choose religions from which to illustrate their answer, there may be 
some general Content, ie credible comments which students will make which could be applied to any 
religion or perhaps to a secular viewpoint as well. Where these are appropriate they are usually given 
first.  The Mark Scheme will also include, under separate headings, Content sections for each of the six 
religions allowed within the Specifications. 
 
General Guidance  
 
.../.. means that these are acceptable alternative answers in the mark scheme, eg Guru Har Krishan / 
Guru Tegh Bahadur / Guru Gobind Singh.  
 
Answers may include specialist terms, in Hebrew or Arabic for example. If this is the case, the mark 
scheme will usually indicate this by providing in brackets the English as well, eg ‘Yom Kippur (the Day of 
Atonement)’. In such questions, answers will be credited whether provided in the original language or in 
English.  
 
Some mark schemes use bullet points to separate content. Each bullet point refers to a different possible 
‘belief’ or ‘teaching’ or ‘way’, depending on the question.  Obliques (.../..) used within the bullet point 
indicate different ways in which the point may be expressed and points which may be made to give the 
further detail or development needed for the second mark. 
 

MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
4 
Where a student has crossed out a complete answer, it should be marked if it remains legible, unless an 
alternative is provided in which case only the alternative should be marked. When part of an answer is 
crossed out, then only what remains should be considered. 
 
In questions where credit can be given to the development of a point, those developments can take the 
form of: 
• Example or evidence 
• Reference to different views 
• Detailed information. 
 
1 mark multiple choice questions 
Such questions have four alternatives and the one correct answer will be given together with the correct 
letter, eg ‘Answer: D   Trinity’. 
 
2 mark short answer questions 
The principle here is provided in the mark scheme: ‘One mark for each of two correct points.’ Students 
may give more than the two answers required by the question. In such instances,   
 
• Award for the first two answers only, wherever they appear.  
• If a student gives more than one answer on the first line and another answer / other answers on the 
second line, the ‘first two answers’ will be the first two on the first line and only these two should be 
considered for marks. Other answers must be ignored. 
• If on the first line the first two answers given are correct, award two marks, regardless of what is 
written elsewhere in the answer.  
• If the first two answers can only be awarded one mark yet there is a third answer that is correct, this 
correct third answer must be ignored and no mark given for it. 
• However, if the student gives some elaboration after the first answer, which is clearly developing 
their first answer, (which they are not required to do), do not consider this elaboration to be their 
second answer (unless the elaboration happens to contain a second correct answer to the question 
asked), regardless of whether there are other answers provided.  In this case, the second answer 
also, if correct, may be credited for the second mark 
 
4 and 5 mark answer questions 
 
Examiners should take care to note the target of the question.  Clear information is provided for these 
types of question on how to award marking points.  Examiners should carefully read the additional 
instructions provided for each type of question (eg for influence questions the final sentence in the 
general guidance box reminds the examiner that the second mark (detailed explanation) awarded in 
each case must show clear ‘influence’).  
 
12 mark answer questions  
 
The 12 mark questions test Evaluation skills (AO2).  The mark scheme for these answers is based on 
Levels of Response marking in which the examiner is required to make a judgement on the completed 
answer taken as a whole. 
 

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
5 
Level of response marking instructions 
 
In GCSE Religious Studies, differentiation is largely achieved by outcome on the basis of students’ 
responses.  To facilitate this, level of response marking has been devised for many questions. 
 
Level of response marking requires a quite different approach from the examiner than the traditional 
‘point for point’ marking.  It is essential that the whole response is read and then allocated to the level 
it best fits. 
 
If a student demonstrates knowledge, understanding and/or evaluation at a certain level, he/she must be 
credited at that level.  Length of response or literary ability should not be confused with genuine 
religious studies skills.  For example, a short answer which shows a high level of conceptual ability 
must be credited at that level.  (If there is a band of marks allocated to a level, discrimination should be 
made with reference to the development of the answer.) 
 
Examiners should refer to the stated assessment target objective of a question (see mark scheme) 
when there is any doubt as to the relevance of a student’s response. 
 
Level of response mark schemes include either examples of possible students’ responses or material 
which they might use.  These are intended as a guide only.  It is anticipated that students will produce a 
wide range of responses to each question. 
 
It is a feature of levels of response mark schemes that examiners are prepared to reward fully responses 
which are obviously valid and of high ability but do not conform exactly to the requirements of a particular 
level.  If examiners have any doubt about what level to award a response, they should consult their team 
leader.  
 
Level of response mark schemes are broken down into levels, each of which has a descriptor.  The 
descriptor for the level shows the average performance for the level.  There are marks in each level. 
 
Before examiners apply the mark scheme to a student’s answer they should read through the answer 
and annotate it (as instructed) to show the qualities that are being looked for.  They should then apply 
the mark scheme. It may be necessary to read the answer more than once to be sure of assigning the 
correct Level.   
 
Step 1 Determine a level 
 
Start at the lowest level of the mark scheme and use it as a ladder to see whether the answer meets the 
descriptor for that level.  The descriptor for the level indicates the different qualities that might be seen in 
the student’s answer for that level.  If it meets the lowest level then go to the next one and decide if it 
meets this level, and so on, until you have a match between the level descriptor and the answer.  With 
practice and familiarity you will find that for better answers you will be able to quickly skip through the 
lower levels of the mark scheme. 
 
When assigning a level you should look at the overall quality of the answer and not look to pick holes in 
small and specific parts of the answer where the student has not performed quite as well as the rest.  If 
the answer covers different aspects of different levels of the mark scheme you should use a best fit 
approach for defining the level and then use the variability of the response to help decide the mark within 
the level, ie if the response is predominantly level 3 with a small amount of level 4 material it would be 
placed in level 3 but be awarded a mark near the top of the level because of the level 4 content. 
  

MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
6 
Step 2 Determine a mark 
 
Once you have assigned a level you need to decide on the mark.  The descriptors on how to allocate 
marks can help with this.  The exemplar materials used during standardisation will help.     
 
You may well need to read back through the answer as you apply the mark scheme to clarify points and 
assure yourself that the level and the mark are appropriate. 
 
Indicative content in the mark scheme is provided as a guide for examiners.  It is not intended to be 
exhaustive and you must credit other valid points.  Students do not have to cover all of the points 
mentioned in the Indicative content to reach the highest level of the mark scheme. 
 
An answer which contains nothing of relevance to the question must be awarded no marks. 
 
 
Spelling, Punctuation and Grammar (SPaG) 
 
Spelling, punctuation and grammar will be assessed in 12-mark questions. 
 
Spelling, punctuation and grammar (SPaG) will be assessed against the following criteria: 
 
Level Performance descriptor Marks 
awarded 
High 
performance 
• Learners spell and punctuate with consistent accuracy 
• Learners use rules of grammar with effective control of meaning overall 
• Learners use a wide range of specialist terms as appropriate 
 
3 
Intermediate 
performance 
 
• Learners spell and punctuate with considerable accuracy 
• Learners use rules of grammar with general control of meaning overall 
• Learners use a good range of specialist terms as appropriate 
 
2 
Threshold 
performance 
 
• Learners spell and punctuate with reasonable accuracy 
• Learners use rules of grammar with some control of meaning and any 
errors do not significantly hinder meaning overall 
• Learners use a limited range of specialist terms as appropriate 
 
1 
No marks 
awarded 
 
• The learner writes nothing 
• The learner’s response does not relate to the question 
• The learner’s achievement in SPaG does not reach the threshold 
performance level, for example errors in spelling, punctuation and 
grammar severely hinder meaning 
 
0 
 
  

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
7 
0 1 
 
 Islam: Beliefs 
 
0 1 
 
. 1 
 
Which one of the following terms means that God is involved in the world? 
[1 mark] 
  A Eternal 
B Immanent 
C Transcendent 
D Unchanging 
 
 
Target: AO1:1  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
 
Answer:  B  Immanent 
 
 
0 1 
 
. 2 
 
Give two Muslim beliefs about angels. 
[2 marks] 
 
Target: AO1:1  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
 
One mark for each of two correct points.  
 
If students provide more than two responses only the first two responses should be 
considered for marking. 
 
Students may include two of the following points, but all other relevant points must be 
credited.  
 
They are made of light (nur) / they are sinless / they fly / they obey Allah / they have no free will / 
they are genderless / they may appear in male form /  bowed down to Adam / they record the deeds 
of all people / they circle the throne of Allah in the heaven / it is part of the Six Articles of Faith / they 
bring revelations from God / Jibril / they each have a task to complete / eg the weather angel 
(Mika’il) / angel of mercy, provides nourishment for the Earth / reward good deeds / blowing the 
trumpet (Israfil) etc / Munkar and Nakir will question individuals in the grave / they can take on 
human form / there are thousands of angels, etc. 
 
Allow for naming of specific angels up to 2 marks. 
 
  

MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
8 
0 1 
 
. 3 
 
Explain two ways in which the revelation of the Qur’an influences Muslims 
today. 
 [4 marks] 
 
Target: AO1:2  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
influence on individuals, communities and societies 
 
First way  
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate influence – 1 mark 
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate influence – 2 marks 
 
Second way  
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate influence – 1 mark 
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate influence – 2 marks 
 
To be a ‘detailed explanation’ the ‘influence’ of the way must be included. 
 
Students may include some of the following points, but all other relevant points must be 
credited.  
 
• The Qur’an is the direct word of Allah / this influences them to obey it. 
• The Qur’an is a divine revelation and so is God talking to humans which influences them to live a 
good life. 
• The Qur’an was revealed on the Night of Power / Muslims may spend this night in worship.  
• It influences Muslims to follow the teachings of the Qur’an / this includes believing in the Six 
Articles of Faith / Five roots of Usul ad-Din / it also influences them to follow the Five  
Pillars / Ten Obligatory Acts / eg paying Zakah, fasting and completing the pilgrimage to Makkah.  
• Influences them to appreciate the names of God e.g. supremacy of Gods will / 99 names of Allah 
• They will avoid sins / those things that the Qur’an prohibits / eg lying, stealing and committing 
shirk.  
• They will live according to the laws of the Qur’an this includes dietary laws / following Shariah law 
eg consuming halal food and marrying, etc.  
• They will respect the Qur’an by completing wudu before touching it. ‘None can grasp it except the 
purified.’ (56:79) 
• They will cover the Qur’an and place it in a high place out of respect. 
• They will read the Qur’an / teach it / memorise it (hifz) / recite it in daily prayers and not talk whilst 
it is being recited. ‘So when the Qur'an is recited, then listen to it and pay attention that you may 
receive mercy.’ (7:204), etc.  
  

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
9 
0 1 
 
. 4 
 
Explain two Muslim beliefs about the Day of Judgement. 
 
Refer to sacred writings or another source of Muslim belief and teaching in  
your answer. 
[5 marks] 
 
Target: AO1:1  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
 
First belief 
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate belief – 1 mark  
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate belief – 2 marks  
 
Second belief 
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate belief – 1  mark  
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate belief – 2 marks 
 
Relevant and accurate reference to sacred writing or another source of Muslim belief and 
teaching – 1 mark 
 
Students may include some of the following points, but all other relevant points must be 
credited. 
 
• Muslims believe that Allah will resurrect them on the Day of Judgement / this will take place 
after they die. 
• The belief in the Day of Judgment is part of the Six Articles of Faith / Five Roots of Usul ad-
Din. 
• Some Muslims believe only God has knowledge of when Judgement Day will happen (Qur’ 
• The Day of Judgment / marks the beginning of resurrection / will take place after God 
destroys the world / this will happen when the trumpet is blown for the second time. 
• On this day people will receive their book of deeds from the angels / those receiving this in 
the right hand will be granted paradise / those receiving it in their left will be sent to hell.  
• On this day the good will be rewarded and sent paradise / the bad will be punished and sent 
to hell. 
• People will be made to walk the ‘Sirat Bridge’ / this spans the fire of hell / good people will be 
transported across the bridge quickly and enter heaven. 
• Those that have died are waiting in Barzakh for the Day of Judgement.  
• On this day, those that have done good will have bright faces / whereas those that have 
done wrong will have dark faces. 
• God will forgive who he wills on this day / as long as they have not committed major sins like 
shirk, etc. 
 
Sources of authority might include: 
 
• ‘On couches of well-woven cloth they will sit facing each other.’ (Qur’an 56:15) 
• ‘They will dwell amid scorching wind and scalding water in the shadow of black smoke, 
neither cold nor refreshing.’ (Qur’an 56:42-44). 
• On the Day faces will turn white and faces will turn black. As for those whose faces turn 
black, [to them it will be said], ‘Did you disbelieve after your belief? Then taste the 
punishment for what you used to reject.’ (Qur’an 3:106) 

MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
10 
• ‘On the Day of Resurrection Allah will hold the whole earth and fold the heaven with His right 
hand and say, ‘I am the King: where are the kings of the earth?’ (hadith) 
  

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
11 
0 1 
 
. 5 
 
‘Tawhid (the Oneness of God) is the most important Muslim belief.’ 
 
Evaluate this statement.  
 
In your answer you should: 
• refer to Muslim teaching  
• give reasoned arguments to support this statement  
• give reasoned arguments to support a different point of view  
• reach a justified conclusion.  
[12 marks] 
[Plus SPaG 3 marks] 
 
Target: AO2:1a and 1b  Analyse and evaluate aspects of religion and belief, including 
significance and influence  
 
Level Criteria Marks 
4 A well-argued response, reasoned consideration of different points of view.  
Logical chains of reasoning leading to judgement(s) supported by knowledge and 
understanding of relevant evidence and information.  
References to religion applied to the issue. 
10–12 
3 Reasoned consideration of different points of view.  
Logical chains of reasoning that draw on knowledge and understanding of 
relevant evidence and information.  
Clear reference to religion. 
7–9 
2 Reasoned consideration of a point of view.  
A logical chain of reasoning drawing on knowledge and understanding of relevant 
evidence and information.  
OR  
Recognition of different points of view, each supported by relevant 
reasons/evidence.  
Maximum of Level 2 if there is no reference to religion. 
4–6 
1 Point of view with reason(s) stated in support.  1–3 
0 Nothing worthy of credit.  0 
 
Students may include some of the following evidence and arguments, but all relevant 
evidence and arguments must be credited. 
 
Arguments in support  
 
• It is the pillar that holds up other pillars / It is one of the Articles of Faith / Five Roots of Usul ad-
Din / it is mentioned in the Shahadah ‘ There is no God but Allah’. 
• Without Tawhid one cannot be classed as a Muslim and so it is the most important.  
• The prophet Muhammad spent his life calling people towards the oneness of Allah, thus showing 
its superiority over other beliefs.  
• All the prophets were called towards monotheistic beliefs, showing its importance above other 
beliefs.  
• Surah 112 contains the key fundamentals of the faith and is considered by some Muslims as the 
most important surah of the Qur’an.  
• The oneness of Allah is a key theme contained within the Qur’an and is the belief that is 
mentioned the most, thus showing its importance.  

MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
12 
• Without this belief the other pillars of faith are redundant, eg Salah, Sawm and Zakah, etc. 
• The belief in Tawhid allows Muslims to be rewarded for their good deeds.  Without this belief 
these deeds are wasted, etc.  
 
Arguments in support of other views  
 
• Belief in the afterlife is more important as it allows Muslims to live good lives, knowing that they 
will be judged by Allah.  
• Belief in the other aspects of God’s nature are equally as important as his oneness / eg his mercy 
and compassion. 
• The Qur’an mentions the Six Articles of Faith and the Five Roots of Usul ad-Din. These may be 
considered more important beliefs, e.g. Imamate, Adalat and supremacy of Gods will, etc. 
including belief in angels, prophets etc, thus making these equally as important as Tawhid.  
• Belief in holy books shows Muslims a practical way of life. They include key teachings which 
allow Muslims to obey Allah.  
• The belief in the Qur’an is more important as it contains all the other beliefs, without which 
Muslims would not be aware of the key fundamentals of the religion.  
• All the beliefs are equal as they form a core part of the religion.  A deficiency in any one of these 
beliefs may move a person further away from Allah.  
• Although the prophet Muhammad emphasised the importance of Tawhid, he also talked 
about the remaining beliefs completing one’s faith, etc.  
 
 
  

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
13 
0 2 
 
 Islam: Practices 
 
0 2 
 
. 1 
 
Which one of the following is the name for Friday prayers in Islam? 
[1 mark] 
   
  
A Ashura  
B Hajj  
C Id-ul-Fitr  
D Jummah  
 
 
Target: AO1:1  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
 
Answer:  D  Jummah 
 
 
0 2 
 
. 2 
 
Give two ways in which a Muslim prepares for Salah (prayer). 
[2 marks] 
 
Target: AO1:1  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
 
One mark for each of two correct points.  
 
If students provide more than two responses only the first two responses should be 
considered for marking. 
 
Students may include two of the following points, but all other relevant points must be 
credited: 
 
Perform wudu (ablution) / using sand / dust (tayamum) / wash the body (ghusl) / put on clean 
clothes (physical cleansing) / cover the head eg wear hat, scarf and jilbab / remove shoes / put 
down a prayer mat / find a clean, quiet space / put down a stone to prostrate upon / the call to 
prayer (azan) is said / face Makkah / the Ka’aba / find the direction of qibla / mentally prepare for 
salah (spiritual cleansing) / make intention for prayer / use a special toothbrush to cleanse the 
mouth (miswak) / apply perfume / having a separate space for men and women, etc. 
 
  

MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
14 
0 2 
 
. 3 
 
Explain two contrasting ways in which Muslims celebrate Id-ul-Adha. 
 [4 marks] 
 
Target: AO1:3  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
similarities and differences within and/or between religions and beliefs  
 
First contrasting way  
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate contrast – 1 mark  
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate contrast – 2 marks  
 
Second contrasting way 
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate contrast – 1 mark  
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate contrast – 2 marks 
 
Contrast may mean opposing or may mean different views. 
 
If similar ways are given, only one of them may be credited up to 2 marks max. 
 
 
Students may include some of the following points, but all other relevant points must be 
credited.  
 
• Muslims will rise early and bathe (ghusl). 
• Some Muslims may sacrifice an animal to remember the sacrifice of Ibrahim / meat is distributed 
to friends, family, and the poor. Those that cannot afford to do so may give charity to the poor. 
• They may wear new clothes and attend the mosque for morning prayers / pray outside / listen to 
the sermon. 
• For some Muslims the festival forms part of Hajj / they may congratulate each other for 
completing this important ritual. 
• Attend the hospital / graveyard to remember those that are ill / have passed away. 
• Sharing gifts, money and sweets with family and friends. 
• Homes are decorated and special food is prepared. 
• They will forgive others and make amends for the wrong that they have done to others, etc.  
 
NB: References to rituals that take place exclusively during Id-ul-Fitr are not creditworthy.  
  

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
15 
0 2 
 
. 4 
 
Explain two reasons why Muslims give Zakah. 
 
Refer to sacred writings or another source of Muslim belief and teaching in  
your answer. 
[5 marks] 
 
Target: AO1:1  Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of religion and belief, including 
beliefs, practices and sources of authority  
 
First reason 
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate reason – 1 mark  
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate reason – 2 marks  
 
Second reason 
 
Simple explanation of a relevant and accurate reason – 1  mark  
Detailed explanation of a relevant and accurate reason – 2 marks 
 
Relevant and accurate reference to sacred writing or another source of Muslim belief and 
teaching – 1 mark 
 
Students may include some of the following points, but all other relevant points must be 
credited.  
 
• It is mentioned in the Qur’an / it is one of the Five Pillars of Islam / Ten Obligatory Acts / an 
obligation that must be completed each year for those that have savings (nisab). 
• It cleanses wealth / and reminds Muslims that all material possessions are temporary and 
ultimately belong to Allah. (Hadith). 
• Zakah helps to create balance in society / it tries to narrow the gap between the rich and poor. 
• Zakah strengthens community ties / by making the rich support the poor / strengthens the Ummah 
• It gives Muslims a good attitude towards money / and it helps them to learn to share and not be 
greedy. 
• The prophet Muhammad emphasised the importance of giving Zakah / Muslims follow in his 
footsteps, etc. 
• It is a way to practice greater jihad / earn reward / get to paradise, etc. 
 
Sources of authority might include: 
 
 
• ‘O you who believe, you shall give to charity from the provisions we have given to you.’ (Qur’an 
2:254) 
• ‘Islam is built on Five Pillars.’ (hadith) 
• ‘He who sleeps whilst his neighbour goes hungry is not one of us.’ (hadith) 
• ‘They ask you about giving: say, “The charity you give shall go to the parents, the relatives, the 
orphans, the poor, and the traveller.” Any good you do, God is fully aware thereof.’ (Qur’an 2:215)
 
• ‘And establish prayer and give Zakat’ (Qur’an 2:110) 
• Whoever is made wealthy by Allah and does not pay the Zakat of his wealth, then on the Day of 
Resurrection his wealth will be made like a snake. The snake will encircle his neck and bite his 
cheeks and say, 'I am your wealth, I am your treasure.' 
 
 

MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
16 
 
0 2 
 
. 5 
 
‘Following Muslim practices is difficult in the modern world.’ 
 
Evaluate this statement.  
 
In your answer you should:  
• refer to Muslim teaching 
• give reasoned arguments to support this statement  
• give reasoned arguments to support a different point of view  
• reach a justified conclusion.  
[12 marks] 
 
Target: AO2:1a and 1b  Analyse and evaluate aspects of religion and belief, including 
significance and influence  
 
Level Criteria Marks 
4 A well-argued response, reasoned consideration of different points of view.  
Logical chains of reasoning leading to judgement(s) supported by knowledge and 
understanding of relevant evidence and information.  
References to religion applied to the issue. 
10–12 
3 Reasoned consideration of different points of view.  
Logical chains of reasoning that draw on knowledge and understanding of 
relevant evidence and information.  
Clear reference to religion. 
7–9 
2 Reasoned consideration of a point of view.  
A logical chain of reasoning drawing on knowledge and understanding of relevant 
evidence and information.  
OR  
Recognition of different points of view, each supported by relevant 
reasons/evidence.  
Maximum of Level 2 if there is no reference to religion. 
4–6 
1 Point of view with reason(s) stated in support.  1–3 
0 Nothing worthy of credit.  0 
 
Students may include some of the following evidence and arguments, but all relevant 
evidence and arguments must be credited.  
 
Arguments in support 
 
• Some practices are difficult because people live busy lives / this is part of greater jihad / praying 
five times a day may be difficult due to school / work commitments / temptations from the devil. 
• There may be no facilities to pray or a lack of understanding of the faith / this may lead to 
discrimination / makes practising difficult. 
• Fasting may be difficult due to the length of time and the busy lives that people live. 
• Wearing religious dress / hijab may be difficult as it is not considered the norm in many societies / 
there may be a pressure to conform to friends and celebrities / influence from social media. 
• Going for Hajj or celebrating Eid may be difficult as it requires time off from worldly commitments. 
• The cost of living makes practices like Zakah and Hajj more difficult to fulfil , etc. 
• It may be difficult to obtain halal food in some places making it difficult to abide by food laws, etc. 

 MARK SCHEME – GCSE RELIGIOUS STUDIES A – 8062/15 – JUNE 2023 
17 
 
 
Arguments in support of other views 
 
• Muslims consider Islam / Shariah to be for all times and places / ‘Allah does not burden a soul 
more than it can bear’ (Qur’an) / this shows that the religious practices are not difficult. 
• The Qur’an is timeless and applicable for all times and places. 
• Society is more understanding of differing religious needs / schools and work places have prayer 
rooms for Muslims to use. 
• Muslims have been practising their faith for hundreds of years and have found a way to navigate 
their busy lives around their religious practices. 
• Society is more accommodating of religious obligations and so it is no longer difficult / new laws 
help to protect religious groups from being discriminated against. 
• There are many concessions to religious practices including combining of salah when travelling / 
exemption from fasting and only having to perform hajj once in a lifetime, etc.  
• There are established Muslim communities / mosques to help Muslims practice their faith. 
• Social media can be used in a positive way to facilitate the promotion of Islamic role models / 
thus making practising Islam easier in the modern world, etc. 
 
 
 
 